REGISTER: mseccfg
RULE 1: If Zkr is not implemented, then the sseed and useed bits of mseccfg are hardwired to zero.
RULE 2: If S-mode is not implemented, then the sseed bit of mseccfg is hardwired to zero.
RULE 3: If U-mode is not implemented, then the useed bit of mseccfg is hardwired to zero.
RULE 4: If the sseed bit in mseccfg is 0, then any attempted access to the seed CSR from U, S, or HS mode raises an illegal‑instruction exception.
RULE 5: If the useed bit in mseccfg is 0, then any attempted access to the seed CSR from U, S, or HS mode raises an illegal‑instruction exception.
RULE 6: If execution is in VS or VU mode and a read‑only instruction attempts to access the seed CSR, then an illegal‑instruction exception is raised.
RULE 7: If execution is in VS or VU mode and a read‑write instruction attempts to access the seed CSR while mseccfg.sseed is 1, then a virtual‑instruction exception is raised.
RULE 8: In VS or VU mode, the value of mseccfg.useed must not influence the type of exception generated by a seed CSR access.
RULE 9: Implementations may make the sseed and useed bits of mseccfg read‑only constant zero.
RULE 10: Software may determine whether seed CSR access can be enabled in U and S mode by writing 1 to the sseed and useed bits of mseccfg and then reading back the values.
RULE 11: If mseccfg.RLB is 1, then locked PMP rules may be removed or modified and locked PMP entries may be edited.
RULE 12: If mseccfg.RLB is 0 and any pmpcfg.L field equals 1, then mseccfg.RLB remains 0 and any attempted modification of the RLB field is ignored until a PMP reset.
RULE 13: If mseccfg.MMWP is set to 1, then it cannot be cleared until a PMP reset.
RULE 14: If mseccfg.MMWP is set to 1, then the default PMP policy for M-mode for memory regions without a matching PMP rule becomes denied rather than ignored.
RULE 15: If mseccfg.MML is set to 1, then it cannot be cleared until a PMP reset.
RULE 16: If mseccfg.MML is 1, then a pmpcfg.L value of 1 marks the rule as M‑mode‑only (enforced on Machine mode and denied in S/U mode).
RULE 17: If mseccfg.MML is 1, then a pmpcfg.L value of 0 marks the rule as S/U‑mode‑only (enforced on Supervisor/User mode and denied in Machine mode).
RULE 18: If mseccfg.MLPE is 1, then the Zicfilp extension is enabled in M-mode.
RULE 19: If mseccfg.MLPE is 0, then the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in M-mode.
RULE 20: If mseccfg.MLPE is 0, then the hart does not update the ELP state (it remains NO_LP_EXPECTED) and the LPAD instruction operates as a no‑op.
RULE 21: If the PMM field of mseccfg is written with a value that enables pointer masking, then pointer masking for M-mode is enabled; if the PMM field is written with a value that disables pointer masking, then pointer masking for M-mode is disabled.
RULE 22: Reserved bits of mseccfg should always read as zero.
RULE 23: If software writes a value to any defined field of mseccfg, then the final stored value must be a legal value for that field (WARL).

REGISTER: mstatus
RULE 1: When a trap is taken from privilege mode y into privilege mode x, mstatus.xPIE is set to the previous value of mstatus.xIE, mstatus.xIE is cleared to 0, and mstatus.xPP is set to y.
RULE 2: When an xRET instruction (MRET or SRET) is executed, mstatus.xIE is restored from mstatus.xPIE, the hart’s privilege mode is changed to the value in mstatus.xPP, mstatus.xPIE is set to 1, and mstatus.xPP is set to the least‑privileged supported mode (U if implemented, otherwise M).
RULE 3: If the new privilege mode after an xRET instruction is not M, then the xRET instruction also clears mstatus.MPRV to 0.
RULE 4: If mstatus.MDT = 1, then any explicit CSR write that targets mstatus.MIE forces mstatus.MIE to be cleared to 0, regardless of the written value (for RV64 the clearing occurs even if the same write also attempts to set MIE).
RULE 5: mstatus.MIE may be set to 1 only by an explicit CSR write when mstatus.MDT = 0 (for RV64 the same write must also set mstatus.MDT = 0).
RULE 6: When a trap is taken into M‑mode and mstatus.MDT = 0, the hardware sets mstatus.MDT to 1 before delivering the trap.
RULE 7: If a trap is taken into M‑mode while mstatus.MDT is already 1, the trap is classified as an unexpected trap.
RULE 8: Execution of an MRET or SRET instruction clears mstatus.MDT to 0.
RULE 9: If mstatus.MPRV = 0, then explicit loads and stores use the current privilege mode for address translation and protection checks.
RULE 10: If mstatus.MPRV = 1 and mstatus.MPV = 0 and mstatus.MPP = 0, then explicit memory accesses are performed with U‑level privilege using HS‑level translation and protection only.
RULE 11: If mstatus.MPRV = 1 and mstatus.MPV = 0 and mstatus.MPP = 1, then explicit memory accesses are performed with HS‑level privilege using HS‑level translation and protection only.
RULE 12: If mstatus.MPRV = 1 and mstatus.MPP = 3, then explicit memory accesses are performed with M‑level privilege with no address translation.
RULE 13: If mstatus.MPRV = 1, mstatus.MPV = 1 and mstatus.MPP = 0, then explicit memory accesses are performed with VU‑level privilege using two‑stage translation, and HS‑level MXR makes any executable page readable while VS‑level MXR permits readability only if the page is also readable at the guest‑physical stage.
RULE 14: If mstatus.MPRV = 1, mstatus.MPV = 1 and mstatus.MPP = 1, then explicit memory accesses are performed with VS‑level privilege using two‑stage translation, and HS‑level MXR makes any executable page readable while VS‑level MXR permits readability only if the page is also readable at the guest‑physical stage; VS‑level SUM applies instead of HS‑level SUM.
RULE 15: If mstatus.MXR = 0, then a load succeeds only from a page whose read permission bit is set.
RULE 16: If mstatus.MXR = 1, then a load succeeds from a page that has either the read or the execute permission bit set.
RULE 17: mstatus.MXR has no effect when page‑based virtual memory is not in effect, and mstatus.MXR is read‑only 0 if S‑mode is not implemented.
RULE 18: If mstatus.SUM = 0, then a supervisor‑mode access to a page that is accessible by user mode faults.
RULE 19: If mstatus.SUM = 1, then supervisor‑mode accesses to pages that are accessible by user mode are permitted.
RULE 20: mstatus.SUM has no effect when page‑based virtual memory is not in effect, and mstatus.SUM is read‑only 0 if S‑mode is not implemented or if satp.MODE is read‑only 0.
RULE 21: If mstatus.MBE = 0, then non‑instruction‑fetch memory accesses made from M‑mode use little‑endian byte ordering (assuming mstatus.MPRV = 0).
RULE 22: If mstatus.MBE = 1, then non‑instruction‑fetch memory accesses made from M‑mode use big‑endian byte ordering (assuming mstatus.MPRV = 0).
RULE 23: If mstatus.SBE = 0, then non‑instruction‑fetch memory accesses made from S‑mode use little‑endian ordering (assuming mstatus.MPRV = 0).
RULE 24: If mstatus.SBE = 1, then non‑instruction‑fetch memory accesses made from S‑mode use big‑endian ordering (assuming mstatus.MPRV = 0).
RULE 25: If mstatus.UBE = 0, then non‑instruction‑fetch memory accesses made from U‑mode use little‑endian ordering (assuming mstatus.MPRV = 0).
RULE 26: If mstatus.UBE = 1, then non‑instruction‑fetch memory accesses made from U‑mode use big‑endian ordering (assuming mstatus.MPRV = 0).
RULE 27: If the hypervisor extension is implemented, then writes to mstatus.MPV record the virtualization mode (V) at trap entry.
RULE 28: If the hypervisor extension is implemented, then writes to mstatus.GVA indicate whether the trap’s mtval contains a guest virtual address.
RULE 29: If the hypervisor extension is implemented, then the behavior of mstatus.TSR, mstatus.TVM, and mstatus.TW is limited to affecting only HS‑mode (they do not affect VS‑mode), and mstatus.TW affects all modes except M‑mode.
RULE 30: If mstatus.TVM = 1, then any attempt in S‑mode to read or write the satp CSR or to execute SFENCE.VMA, SINVAL.VMA, or any instruction that accesses satp raises an illegal‑instruction exception; mstatus.TVM is read‑only 0 when S‑mode is not implemented.
RULE 31: If mstatus.TW = 1 and the WRS.NTO instruction is executed in any privilege mode other than M‑mode and does not complete within an implementation‑specific bounded time limit, then an illegal‑instruction exception is raised.
RULE 32: When executing in VS or VU mode, if hstatus.VTW = 1, mstatus.TW is cleared, and WRS.NTO does not complete within the bounded limit, then a virtual‑instruction exception is raised.
RULE 33: If mstatus.TSR = 1, then attempts to execute the SRET instruction while executing in S‑mode raise an illegal‑instruction exception; mstatus.TSR is read‑only 0 when S‑mode is not implemented.
RULE 34: If the F extension is implemented, then mstatus.FS shall not be read‑only 0.
RULE 35: If neither the F extension nor S‑mode is implemented, then mstatus.FS is read‑only 0.
RULE 36: If S‑mode is implemented but the F extension is not, then mstatus.FS may optionally be read‑only 0.
RULE 37: Executing an instruction that changes floating‑point state (including accesses to floating‑point CSRs) changes mstatus.FS from Initial or Clean to Dirty.
RULE 38: If mstatus.FS = Off, then any instruction that attempts to read or write floating‑point state causes an illegal‑instruction exception.
RULE 39: If the vector extension is implemented, then mstatus.VS shall not be read‑only 0.
RULE 40: If neither the vector extension nor S‑mode is implemented, then mstatus.VS is read‑only 0.
RULE 41: If S‑mode is implemented but the vector extension is not, then mstatus.VS may optionally be read‑only 0.
RULE 42: Executing an instruction that changes vector state (including accesses to vector CSRs) changes mstatus.VS from Initial or Clean to Dirty.
RULE 43: Implementations may also change mstatus.VS from Initial or Clean to Dirty at any time even when no vector‑state change occurs.
RULE 44: If mstatus.VS = Off, then attempts to execute any vector instruction or to access vector CSRs raise an illegal‑instruction exception.
RULE 45: If mstatus.VS = Dirty, then mstatus.SD = 1; otherwise mstatus.SD reflects the Dirty status of mstatus.FS and mstatus.XS according to the existing specification.
RULE 46: If the Zfinx extension is implemented, then mstatus.FS is hard‑wired to 0 and has no effect on the trapping behavior of floating‑point instructions or fcsr accesses.
RULE 47: The permission to execute CMO (Cache‑Management Operations) instructions may be affected by the values of mstatus.MPRV, mstatus.MPV, mstatus.MPP, mstatus.SUM, and mstatus.MXR.
RULE 48: If the hypervisor extension is implemented, then mstatus.MPV records the virtualization mode at trap entry and is restored by MRET.
RULE 49: If the hypervisor extension is implemented, then mstatus.GVA indicates whether mtval on a trap contains a guest virtual address.