## 31.8.5.4. Continuous Health Tests

Health monitoring requires some state information related to the noise source to be maintained. The tests should be designed in a way that a specific number of samples guarantees a state flush (no hung states).  We  suggest  flush  size W  =<  1024 to  match  with  the  NIST  SP  800-90B  required  tests  (See Section 4.4 in (Turan et al., 2018)). The state is also fully zeroized in a system reset.

The  two  mandatory  tests  can  be  built  with  minimal  circuitry.  Full  histograms  are  not  required,  only simple counter registers: repetition count, window count, and sample count. Repetition count is reset every time the output sample value changes; if the count reaches a certain cutoff limit, a noise alarm ( BIST ) or failure ( DEAD ) is signaled. The window counter is used to save every W'th output (typically W in { 512, 1024 }). The frequency of this reference sample in the following window is counted; cutoff values are  defined  in  the  standard.  We  see  that  the  structure  of  the  mandatory  tests  is  such  that,  if  well

implemented, no information is carried beyond a limit of W samples.

Section  4.5  of  (Turan  et  al.,  2018)  explicitly  permits  additional  developer-defined  tests,  and  several more were defined in early versions of FIPS 140-1 before being "crossed out." The choice of additional tests depends on the nature and implementation of the physical source.

Especially  if  a  non-cryptographic  conditioner  is  used  in  hardware,  it  is  possible  that  the  AIS  31 (Killmann  &  Schindler,  2011)  online  tests  are  implemented  by  driver  software.  They  can  also  be implemented in hardware. For some security profiles, AIS 31 mandates that their tolerances are set in a way that the probability of an alarm is at least 10 -6 yearly under "normal usage." Such requirements are problematic in modern applications since their probability is too high for critical systems.

There rarely is anything that can or should be done about a non-fatal alarm condition in an operatorfree,  autonomous  system.  However,  AIS  31  allows  the  DRBG  component  to  keep  running  despite  a failure in its Entropy Source, so we suggest re-entering a temporary BIST state (Section 31.8.4) to signal a non-fatal statistical error if such (non-actionable) signaling is necessary. Drivers and applications can react to this appropriately (or simply log it), but it will not directly affect the availability of the TRNG. A permanent error condition should result in DEAD state.