## 33.1. Landing Pad (Zicfilp)

To enforce forward-edge control-flow integrity,  the  Zicfilp  extension  introduces  a  landing  pad  ( LPAD ) instruction.  The LPAD instruction  must  be  placed  at  the  program  locations  that  are  valid  targets  of indirect  jumps  or  calls.  The LPAD instruction  (See  Section  33.1.2)  is  encoded  using  the AUIPC major opcode with rd = x0 .

Compilers emit a landing pad instruction as the first instruction of an address-taken function, as well as  at  any  indirect  jump  targets.  A  landing  pad  instruction  is  not  required  in  functions  that  are  only reached using a direct call or direct jump.

The landing pad is designed to provide integrity to control transfers performed using indirect calls and jumps, and this is referred to as forward-edge protection. When the Zicfilp is active, the hart tracks an expected  landing  pad  ( ELP )  state  that  is  updated  by  an indirect\_call or indirect\_jump to  require  a landing pad instruction at the target of the branch. If the instruction at the target is not a landing pad, then a software-check exception is raised.

A landing pad may be optionally associated with a 20-bit label. With labeling enabled, the number of landing  pads  that  can  be  reached  from  an  indirect  call  or  jump  sites  can  be  defined  using programming  language-based  policies.  Labeling  of  the  landing  pads  enables  software  to  achieve greater precision in pairing up indirect call/jump sites with valid targets. When labeling of landing pads is  used,  indirect  call  or  indirect  jump  site  can  specify  the  expected  label  of  the  landing  pad  and thereby constrain the set of landing pads that may be reached from each indirect call or indirect jump site in the program.

In the simplest form, a program can be built with a single label value to implement a coarse-grained version of  forward-edge control-flow integrity.  By  constraining  gadgets  to  be  preceded  by  a  landing pad instruction that marks the start of indirect callable functions, the program can significantly reduce the available gadget space. A second form of label generation may generate a signature, such as a MAC, using the prototype of the function. Programs that use this approach would further constrain the gadgets accessible from a call site to only indirectly callable functions that match the prototype of the called functions. Another approach to label generation involves analyzing the control-flow-graph (CFG) of the program, which can lead to even more stringent constraints on the set of reachable gadgets. Such programs may further use multiple labels per function, which means that if a function is called from two or more call sites, the functions can be labeled as being reachable from each of the call sites. For  instance,  consider  two  call  sites  A  and  B,  where  A  calls  the  functions  X  and  Y,  and  B  calls  the functions Y and Z. In a single label scheme, functions X, Y, and Z would need to be assigned the same label so that both call sites A and B can invoke the common function Y. This scheme would allow call site A to also call function Z and call site B to also call function X. However, if function Y was assigned two labels - one corresponding to call site A and the other to call site B, then Y can be invoked by both call sites, but X can only be invoked by call site A and Z can only be invoked by call site B. To support multiple labels, the compiler could generate a call-site-specific entry point for shared functions, with each entry point having its own landing pad instruction followed by a direct branch to the start of the function.  This  would  allow  the  function  to  be  labeled  with  multiple  labels,  each  corresponding  to  a specific call site. A portion of the label space may be dedicated to labeled landing pads that are only valid targets of an indirect jump (and not an indirect call).

The LPAD instruction uses the code points defined as HINTs for the AUIPC opcode. When Zicfilp is not active  at  a  privilege  level  or  when  the  extension  is  not  implemented,  the  landing  pad  instruction executes  as  a  no-op.  A  program  that  is  built  with LPAD instructions  can  thus  continue  to  operate correctly, but without forward-edge control-flow integrity, on processors that do not support the Zicfilp extension or if the Zicfilp extension is not active.

Compilers and linkers should provide an attribute flag to indicate if the program has been compiled with the Zicfilp extension and use that to determine if the Zicfilp extension should be activated. The dynamic loader should activate the use of Zicfilp extension for an application only if all executables (the  application  and  the  dependent  dynamically  linked  libraries)  used  by  that  application  use  the Zicfilp extension.

When  Zicfilp  extension  is  not  active  or  not  implemented,  the  hart  does  not  require  landing  pad instructions at the targets of indirect calls/jumps, and the landing instructions revert to being no-ops. This allows a program compiled with landing pad instructions to operate correctly but without forwardedge control-flow integrity.

The Zicfilp extensions may be activated for use individually and independently for each privilege mode.

The Zicfilp extension depends on the Zicsr extension.