## 12.1.1.5. Double Trap Control in sstatus Register

The  S-mode-disable-trap  ( SDT )  bit  is  a  WARL  field  introduced  by  the  Ssdbltrp  extension  to  address double trap (See Section 3.1.6.2) at privilege modes lower than M.

When the SDT bit is set to 1 by an explicit CSR write, the SIE (Supervisor Interrupt Enable) bit is cleared to 0. This clearing occurs regardless of the value written, if any, to the SIE bit by the same write. The SIE bit can only be set to 1 by an explicit CSR write if the SDT bit is being set to 0 by the same write or is already 0.

When a trap is to be taken into S-mode, if the SDT bit is currently 0, it is then set to 1, and the trap is delivered as expected. However, if SDT is already set to 1, then this is an unexpected trap . In the event of an unexpected trap , a double-trap exception trap is delivered into M-mode. To deliver this trap, the hart  writes  registers,  except mcause and mtval2 ,  with  the  same  information  that  the unexpected  trap would  have  written  if  it  was  taken  into  M-mode.  The mtval2 register  is  then  set  to  what  would  be otherwise written into the mcause register by the unexpected trap .  The mcause register is set to 16, the double-trap exception code.

An SRET instruction sets the SDT bit to 0.

After a trap handler has saved the state, such as scause , sepc ,  and stval ,  needed for resuming from the trap and is reentrant, it should clear the SDT bit.

Resetting the SDT by an SRET enables the trap handler to detect a double trap that may occur during the tail phase, where it restores critical state to return from a trap.

The consequence of this specification is that if a critical error condition was caused by a guest-page fault, then the GPA will not be available in mtval2 when the double trap  is  delivered  to  M-mode.  This  condition  arises  if  the  HS-mode  invokes  a hypervisor virtual-machine load or store instruction when SDT is 1 and the instruction raises  a  guest-page  fault.  The  use  of  such  an  instruction  in  this  phase  of  trap handling  is  not  common.  However,  not  recording  the  GPA  is  considered  benign because, if required, it can still be obtained -albeit with added effort -through the process of walking the page tables.

For a double trap that originates in VS-mode, M-mode should redirect the exception to HS-mode by copying the values of M-mode CSRs updated by the trap to HS-mode CSRs and should use an MRET to resume execution at the address in stvec .

Supervisor Software Events (SSE), an extension to the SBI, provide a mechanism for supervisor  software  to  register  and  service  system  events  emanating  from  an  SBI implementation, such as firmware or a hypervisor. In the event of a double trap, HSmode and M-mode can utilize the SSE mechanism to invoke a critical-error handler in VS-mode or S/HS-mode, respectively. Additionally, the implementation of an SSE protocol can be considered as an optional measure to aid in the recovery from such critical errors.