## 3.6. Physical Memory Attributes

The physical memory  map  for a complete system includes various address ranges,  some corresponding to memory regions and some to memory-mapped control registers, portions of which might not be accessible. Some memory regions might not support reads, writes, or execution; some might  not  support  subword  or  subblock  accesses;  some  might  not  support  atomic  operations;  and some might not support cache coherence or might have different memory models. Similarly, memorymapped control registers vary  in  their  supported  access  widths,  support  for  atomic  operations,  and whether read and write accesses have associated side effects. In RISC-V systems, these properties and capabilities of each region of the machine's physical address space are termed physical memory

attributes (PMAs).  This  section  describes  RISC-V  PMA  terminology  and  how  RISC-V  systems implement and check PMAs.

PMAs are inherent properties of the underlying hardware and rarely change during system operation. Unlike  physical  memory  protection  values  described  in  Section  3.7,  PMAs  do  not  vary  by  execution context. The PMAs of some memory regions are fixed at chip design time-for example, for an on-chip ROM.  Others  are  fixed  at  board  design  time,  depending,  for  example,  on  which  other  chips  are connected  to  off-chip  buses.  Off-chip  buses  might  also  support  devices  that  could  be  changed  on every power cycle (cold pluggable) or dynamically while the system is running (hot pluggable). Some devices  might  be  configurable  at  run  time  to  support  different  uses  that  imply  different  PMAs-for example, an on-chip scratchpad RAM might be cached privately by one core in one end-application, or accessed as a shared non-cached memory in another end-application.

Most systems will require that at least some PMAs are dynamically checked in hardware later in the execution pipeline after the physical address is known, as some operations will not be supported at all physical memory  addresses,  and  some  operations  require knowing  the current setting of  a configurable PMA attribute. While many other architectures specify some PMAs in the virtual memory page tables and use the TLB to inform the pipeline of these properties, this approach injects platformspecific information into a virtualized layer and can cause system errors unless attributes are correctly initialized in each page-table entry for each physical memory region. In addition, the available page sizes might not be optimal for specifying attributes in the physical memory space, leading to addressspace fragmentation and inefficient use of expensive TLB entries.

For RISC-V, we separate out specification and checking of PMAs into a separate hardware structure, the PMA checker .  In  many  cases,  the  attributes  are  known  at  system  design  time  for  each  physical address  region,  and  can  be  hardwired  into  the  PMA  checker.  Where  the  attributes  are  run-time configurable,  platform-specific  memory-mapped  control  registers  can  be  provided  to  specify  these attributes at a granularity appropriate to each region on the platform (e.g., for an on-chip SRAM that can be flexibly divided between cacheable and uncacheable uses). PMAs are checked for any access to physical memory, including accesses that have undergone virtual to physical memory translation. To aid in system debugging, we strongly recommend that, where possible, RISC-V processors precisely trap  physical  memory  accesses  that  fail  PMA  checks.  Precisely  trapped  PMA  violations  manifest  as instruction, load, or store access-fault exceptions, distinct from virtual-memory page-fault exceptions. Precise PMA traps might not always be possible, for example, when probing a legacy bus architecture that  uses  access  failures  as  part  of  the  discovery  mechanism.  In  this  case,  error  responses  from peripheral devices will be reported as imprecise bus-error interrupts.

PMAs must also be readable by software to correctly access certain devices or to correctly configure other hardware components that access memory, such as DMA engines. As PMAs are tightly tied to a given physical platform's organization, many details are inherently platform-specific, as is the means by which software can learn the PMA values for a platform. Some devices, particularly legacy buses, do not support discovery of PMAs and so will give error responses or time out if an unsupported access is attempted. Typically, platform-specific machine-mode code will extract PMAs and ultimately present this information to higher-level less-privileged software using some standard representation.

Where platforms support dynamic reconfiguration of PMAs, an interface will be provided to set the attributes by passing requests to a machine-mode driver that can correctly reconfigure the platform. For  example,  switching  cacheability  attributes  on  some  memory  regions  might  involve  platformspecific operations, such as cache flushes, that are available only to machine-mode.