## 33.2. Shadow Stack (Zicfiss)

The Zicfiss  extension  introduces  a  shadow  stack  to  enforce  backward-edge  control-flow  integrity.  A shadow stack is a second stack used to store a shadow copy of the return address in the link register if it needs to be spilled.

The shadow stack is designed to provide integrity to control transfers performed using a return , where the return may be from a procedure invoked using an indirect call or a direct call, and this is referred to as backward-edge protection.

A program using backward-edge control-flow integrity has two stacks: a regular stack and a shadow stack.  The  shadow  stack  is  used  to  spill  the  link  register,  if  required,  by  non-leaf  functions.  An additional register, shadow-stack-pointer ( ssp ), is introduced in the architecture to hold the address of the top of the active shadow stack.

The  shadow  stack,  similar  to  the  regular  stack,  grows  downwards,  from  higher  addresses  to  lower addresses. Each entry on the shadow stack is XLEN wide and holds the link register value. The ssp points to the top of the shadow stack, which is the address of the last element stored on the shadow stack.

The  shadow  stack  is  architecturally  protected  from  inadvertent  corruptions  and  modifications,  as detailed in the Privileged specification.

The Zicfiss extension provides instructions to store and load the link register to/from the shadow stack and  to  check  the  integrity  of  the  return  address.  The  extension  provides  instructions  to  support common stack maintenance operations such as stack unwinding and stack switching.

When Zicfiss is enabled, each function that needs to spill the link register, typically non-leaf functions, store the link register value to the regular stack and a shadow copy of the link register value to the shadow stack when the function is entered (the prologue). When such a function returns (the epilogue), the function loads the link register from the regular stack and the shadow copy of the link register from the  shadow  stack.  Then,  the  link  register  value  from  the  regular  stack  and  the  shadow  link  register value from the shadow stack are compared. A mismatch of the two values is indicative of a subversion of the return address control variable and causes a software-check exception.

The  Zicfiss  instructions,  except SSAMOSWAP.W/D ,  are  encoded  using  a  subset  of  May-Be-Operation instructions defined by the Zimop and Zcmop extensions. This subset of instructions revert to their Zimop/Zcmop defined behavior when the Zicfiss extension is not implemented or if the extension has not  been  activated.  A  program  that  is  built  with  Zicfiss  instructions  can  thus  continue  to  operate correctly,  but  without  backward-edge  control-flow  integrity,  on  processors  that  do  not  support  the Zicfiss extension or if the Zicfiss extension is not active. The Zicfiss extension may be activated for use individually and independently for each privilege mode.

Compilers should flag each object file (for example, using flags in the ELF attributes) to indicate if the object file has been compiled with the Zicfiss instructions. The linker should flag (for example, using flags in the ELF attributes) the binary/executable generated by linking objects as being compiled with the Zicfiss instructions only if all the object files that are linked have the same Zicfiss attributes.

The  dynamic  loader  should  activate  the  use  of  Zicfiss  extension  for  an  application  only  if  all executables (the application and the dependent dynamically-linked libraries) used by that application use the Zicfiss extension.

An application that has the Zicfiss extension active may request the dynamic loader at runtime to load a new dynamic shared object (using dlopen() for example). If the requested object does not have the Zicfiss attribute then the dynamic loader, based on its policy (e.g., established by the operating system or the administrator) configuration, could either deny the request or deactivate the Zicfiss extension for the application. It is strongly recommended that the policy enforces a strict security posture and denies the request.

The  Zicfiss  extension  depends  on  the  Zicsr  and  Zimop  extensions.  Furthermore,  if  the  Zcmop extension is implemented, the Zicfiss extension also provides the C.SSPUSH and C.SSPOPCHK instructions. Moreover, use of Zicfiss in U-mode requires S-mode to be implemented. Use of Zicfiss in M-mode is not supported.