## Chapter 4. "Smstateen/Ssstateen" Extensions, Version 1.0

The implementation of optional RISC-V extensions has the potential to open covert channels between separate  user  threads,  or  between  separate  guest  OSes  running  under  a  hypervisor.  The  problem occurs when an extension adds processor state -usually explicit registers, but possibly other forms of state -that the main OS or hypervisor is unaware of (and hence won't context-switch) but that can be modified/written by one user thread or guest OS and perceived/examined/read by another.

For  example,  the  Advanced  Interrupt  Architecture  (AIA)  for  RISC-V  adds  to  a  hart  as  many  as  ten supervisor-level CSRs ( siselect , sireg , stopi , sseteipnum , sclreipnum , sseteienum , sclreienum , sclaimei , sieh , and siph )  and  provides  also  the  option  for  hardware  to  be  backward-compatible  with  older,  pre-AIA software.  Because an older hypervisor that is oblivious to the AIA will not know to swap any of the AIA's  new  CSRs  on  context  switches,  the  registers  may  then  be  used  as  a  covert  channel  between multiple guest OSes that run atop this hypervisor. Although traditional practices might consider such a communication channel harmless, the intense focus on security today argues that a means be offered to plug such channels.

The f registers  of  the  RISC-V  floating-point  extensions  and  the v registers  of  the  vector  extension would similarly be potential covert channels between user threads, except for the existence of the FS and VS fields in the sstatus register. Even if an OS is unaware of, say, the vector extension and its v registers, access to those registers is blocked when the VS field is initialized to zero, either at machine level or by the OS itself initializing sstatus .

Obviously, one way to prevent the use of new user-level CSRs as covert channels would be to add to mstatus or sstatus an  "XS"  field  for  each  relevant  extension,  paralleling  the  V  extension's  VS  field. However, this is not considered a general solution to the problem due to the number of potential future extensions  that  may  add  small  amounts  of  state.  Even  with  a  64-bit sstatus (necessitating  adding sstatush for  RV32),  it  is  not  certain  there  are  enough  remaining  bits  in sstatus to  accommodate all future user-level extensions. In any event, there is no need to strain sstatus (and add sstatush ) for this purpose.  The  "enable"  flags  that  are  needed  to  plug  covert  channels  are  not  generally  expected  to require swapping on context switches of user threads, making them a less-than-compelling candidate for inclusion in sstatus . Hence, a new place is provided for them instead.